---
title: "Exploring candidate genes for heat tolerance in ovine through liver gene expression"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-02-29-heliyon
date: 29 February 2024
venue: '<span style="color:#B10E06">Metabolites,v.14</span>'

citation: 'Pantoja MHA, Novais FJ, Mourão GB, Mateescu RG, Poleti MD, Beline M, Monteiro CP, Fukumasu H, Titto CG. Exploring candidate genes for heat tolerance in ovine through liver gene expression. Heliyon. 2024 Feb 6;10(4):e25692. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e25692. PMID: 38370230; PMCID: PMC10869868.'
---

[Access paper here](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e25692)

<b>Abstract</b>

Background: Thermotolerance has become an essential factor in the prevention of the adverse effects of heat stress, but it varies among animals. Identifying genes related to heat adaptability traits is important for improving thermotolerance and for selecting more productive animals in hot environments. The primary objective of this research was to find candidate genes in the liver that play a crucial role in the heat stress response of Santa Ines sheep, which exhibit varying levels of heat tolerance. To achieve this goal, 80 sheep were selected based on their thermotolerance and placed in a climate chamber for 10 days, during which the average temperature was maintained at 36 °C from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. and 28 °C from 4 p.m. to 10 a.m. A subset of 14 extreme animals, with seven thermotolerant and seven non-thermotolerant animals based on heat loss (rectal temperature), were selected for liver sampling. RNA sequencing and differential gene expression analysis were performed. Thermotolerant sheep showed higher expression of genes GPx3, RGS6, GPAT3, VLDLR, LOC101108817, and EVC. These genes were mainly related to the Hedgehog signaling pathway, glutathione metabolism, glycerolipid metabolism, and thyroid hormone synthesis. These enhanced pathways in thermotolerant animals could potentially mitigate the negative effects of heat stress, conferring greater heat resistance.
